this is a bbc
news special as the uk's chief medical
advisor professor chris whitty
and chief scientific advisor sir patrick
valance are about to start their
televised news briefing
with the latest on the coronavirus
pandemic this is the scene live in
downing street
let's go there now i'll give you an
update on where we see the epidemic at
the moment
some of the knowns and some of the
uncertainties
let me just start by reminding you that
this disease spreads by
droplets by surface contact and by
aerosols
hence the hands-face space but also to
remind you
that the way that we reduce the spread
is by limiting our number of contacts
by reducing contacts in environments
where spread is more likely
those are crowded environments indoor
environments
poor ventilation and making sure that we
reduce the probability
of coming into contact with anyone who
is infectious and that's the importance
of self-isolation
keeping out of circulation if you have
or may have the virus
may have the first slide please
i want to start by talking about the
rise in cases elsewhere and what we can
learn
we've seen increased in cases across
europe
and here i've taken examples of spain
and france
we've seen an increase in the numbers of
cases it started
with younger people in their twenties
and spread gradually
to older ages as well that increase in
case number has translated
into an increase in hospitalizations
as the hospitalizations have increased
as you look at the slide on the right
here
you will see that very sadly but not
unexpectedly
deaths are also increasing
so there's a simple message from this
slide which is that
as the disease spreads as it spreads
across
age groups we expect to see
increase in hospitalizations and
unfortunately
those increase in hospitalizations will
lead to an increase in deaths
the virus has genetically moved a bit
but it has not
changed in terms of its propensity and
its ability to
cause disease and to cause death
even though of course most of the
disease deaths
occur in the older population
so where are we here next slide please
these are data from testing and i'll
come back to that point in a minute
and their data for england but the
picture is fairly similar across
the uk and and chris witte will say more
about that
what we see from july as we look at the
increase in cases
per hundred thousand of population an
increase which has
occurred over august and has increased
into september
this is by different age groups and the
top line the blue line
is amongst the 20 to 29 year olds
but what you can see is there's been an
increase in cases across
all age groups the lowest increase has
been in children
and in the population age 70 to 79 but
in
every age group we've seen an increase
could that increase be due to increased
testing the answer is no
we see an increase in positivity of the
test done so we see the proportion of
people testing positive has increased
even if testing stays flat and if we
look at other sources of data
such as for example the ons study which
takes a sample of people across the
population looks at it or studies like
the react
study we see a similar increase
in the o s study it's now estimated
that roughly 70 000 people
in the uk have coveted infection
and that about 6 000 people per day
are getting the infection so we are in a
situation
where numbers are clearly increasing
they're increasing across all age groups
it's a little bit different in different
areas
in terms of geographies and chris will
speak to that
and this increase in numbers is also
translating
into an increase in hospitalization
which chris will say more about
so there's no doubt we are in a
situation where the numbers
increasing what i'd like to do
is just remind you how quickly this can
move
so the next slide is not a prediction
but it is a way of thinking about how
quickly this can change
so this is the uk reported cases per day
against time and you can see running
along the bottom there
the number of cases over june july
and august up to roughly 3 000 cases per
day or so
in september middle of september
at the moment we think that the epidemic
is doubling roughly every seven days
it could be a little bit longer maybe a
little bit shorter but let's say roughly
every seven days
if and that's quite a big if but if that
continues
unabated and this grows
doubling every seven days then what you
see of course
let's say there were five thousand today
it would be ten thousand next week
twenty thousand a week after forty
thousand the week after
and you can see that by mid october if
that continued
you would end up with something like
fifty thousand cases
in the middle of october per day
50 000 cases per day would be expected
to lead a month later so the middle of
november say
to 200 plus deaths per day so this graph
which is not a prediction
is simply showing you how quickly this
can move
if the doubling time stays at seven days
and of course the challenge therefore is
to make sure
the doubling time does not stay at seven
days
there are already things in place which
are expected to slow that
and to make sure that we do not enter
into this exponential growth
and end up with the problems that you
would predict as a result of that
that requires speed it requires action
and it requires enough in order to be
able to bring that down
one final word on this
section so as we see it
cases are increasing hospitalizations
are following
deaths unfortunately will follow that
and there is the potential for this to
move very fast
a word on immunity next slide please
when people have an infection the vast
majority of people
get an antibody response and we know
that some of those antibodies are
so-called neutralizing antibodies they
do indeed protect against the virus
we also know that they fade over time
and there are cases of people becoming
re-infected
so this is not an absolute protection
and it will potentially decrease over
time
what we see is that something under
eight percent of the population
have been infected as we measure the
antibodies
so about eight percent so three million
or so people
may have been infected and have
antibodies
it means that the vast majority of us
are not protected in any way
and are susceptible to this disease
there may be other forms of protection
that increase that number a little bit
other parts of the immune system but it
does mean
that the vast majority of the population
remains susceptible
and therefore you'd expect spread
throughout them the number of people
with antibodies is a little higher in
the cities it may be as high as 17
or so in london that may confer a little
slowing of spread
but not much more than that
at that point i'll pass over to chris to
take you through some of the other
features of the
epidemic chris thanks patrick next slide
please
the what we have here are two maps
they're from england but there would be
similar ones
uh from scotland wales or northern
ireland and what we have on the left
uh here is a map where the darker
colours
are the rate of transmission and on the
right what we have is a map where
orange or yellow or brown
represent an increasing rate of
transmission
the darker that colour the greater the
rate of increase
and green or blue
represent a stable or falling situation
and what you can see in on the left side
is that at the moment
the very high rates of transmission in
the uk are highly concentrated
in particular areas but there are
significant rates of transmission
in many parts of the uk with the darker
colors
but what we've seen is a progression
where after the remarkable efforts which
got the rates right down across the
country
firstly we saw very small outbreaks
might be associated with the workplace
or
another environment then we've seen more
localized outbreaks
which have got larger over time
particularly in the cities
and now what we're seeing is a rate of
increase
across the great majority of the country
it's going at different rates but it is
now
increasing and what we found is that as
the rate as it
as we go through in time uh anywhere
which
was falling is now moving over to
beginning to rise
and then the rate of rise continues in
an upward direction
so this is not someone else's problem
this is all of our problem
next slide please
this graph uh is a simple one it simply
shows
uh the number of inpatient cases in
england
over um the period from the 1st of
august
and until that point in time there had
been a steady fall
over a long period of time right back
from
early april and it then stabilized for a
period
and flattened out but over the period
since the
1st of september you can see a steady
sustained
rise in numbers with a doubling time as
with
the cases of probably seven or eight
days
now what that tells us is that if this
carried on unabated these numbers are
relatively small we're talking about
around 200 at the moment but if this if
we continued along the path that patrick
uh
laid out the number of deaths directly
from covid i'll come back to indirect
deaths
will continue to rise potentially on an
exponential curve that means doubling
and doubling and doubling again
and you can quickly move from really
quite small numbers
to really very large numbers because of
that exponential process
so we have in a bad sense literally
turned a corner
although only relatively recently
and we i think everybody will realize
that at this point the seasons are
against us
we're now going into the seasons late
autumn and winter
which benefit respiratory viruses and it
is very likely
they will benefit covid as they do for
example
flu so we should see this as a six-month
problem that we have to deal with
collectively it's not indefinite
uh and as i come on to science will in
due course uh
can't ride to our rescue but in this
period of the next six months
i think we have to realize that we have
to take this collectively very seriously
a lot of people have said maybe this is
a milder virus
than it was in april i'm afraid although
that would be great if that were true we
see no evidence that is the case
at the moment because the cases started
to rise
most in the lowest age bands in young
adults not in children children
the rates have really not increased as
the data patrick showed
showed young children but in young
adults these are the groups who are
least likely to end up in hospital and
the point we made right from the
beginning
is that for many people this remains a
mild infection but as you move up the
ages if you move into people
who are more vulnerable then the
mortality rates if people get this
rise to quite significant rates and what
we've seen
in other countries and are now clearly
seeing here
is that they're not staying just in the
younger age groups
they're moving up the age bans and the
mortality rates
will be similar to slightly lower than
they were previously but they will be
similar to
what we saw previously and these are
significantly greater for example
than ordinary seasonal flu so seasonal
flu normally
in the uk would on average a year kill
around 7 000
people a year uh tragically and in a bad
flu year as it was for example about
three years ago
uh it might kill uh upward of twenty
thousand a a year
uh this uh virus is more virulent than
flu so the numbers
people talk about are not unreasonable
numbers
for us to be thinking about
treatment is better there's no doubt
about that doctors
nurses have learned to treat this much
more effectively and we have new drugs
such as dexamethasone these will reduce
the mortality rate
but they will definitely not eliminate
or take it right down to trivial levels
uh two other broad points i wanted to
make
the first one is that there are as we've
said from the beginning and it really
does need to be repeated
four ways in which this virus is going
to have a very
potential significant effect on the
population's health
if we let it go out of control the first
the easiest to to
identify is direct covert deaths people
who get the virus and die of the virus
the second would be if the nhs emergency
services
were overwhelmed by a huge spike and
that is what
the extraordinary efforts of the
population allowed to prevent happening
in the first wave we met
the third however is very important and
i think its
importance should not be understated
which is if
the nhs is having to spend a large
proportion of its effort
uh in trying to treat covert cases
because the numbers have gone up very
hot to a very high levels
and trying to put in case in place large
numbers of
systems to try and reduce the risk of
transmission in hospitals
it will lead to a reduction in treatment
for other areas
in early diagnosis of disease and in
prevention programs
beca and so there is an indirect effect
on deaths and on illness
from this impact on the nhs
if we allow the numbers to rise too fast
but on the other side we also know that
some of the things we've had to do
are going to cause significant problems
on in the economy
big social impacts impacts on mental
health
and therefore ministers making decisions
and all of society
have to walk this very difficult balance
if we do too little
this virus will go out of control and we
will get significant numbers of
increased direct and indirect deaths
but if we go too far the other way then
we can cause damage
to the economy which can feed through to
unemployment to poverty
to deprivation all of which have
long-term health effects so
we need always to keep these two sides
in mind
my final point is that if i increase my
risk
a lot of people say well can't people
just be allowed to take their own risk
the problem with a pandemic or an
epidemic infection like this
is if i as an individual increase my
risk i increase the risk
to everyone around me and then everyone
who's a contact to theirs
and sooner or later the chain will meet
people who are vulnerable or elderly or
have a long
term problem from covid so you cannot in
an epidemic
just take your own risk unfortunately
you're taking a
risk on behalf of everybody else it's
important that we see this as something
we have to do collectively
and there are broadly four things we can
do
over the next period to get on top of
this the first of which is
reducing our individual risk and this is
around the things
that we all know about hands face space
washing hands
using masks particularly in environments
which are enclosed in public transport
and so on
and also in particular having
space between people whenever we can
achieve it
especially when indoors the second group
of things are things we can do to
isolate the virus so if people have
symptoms they must self-isolate
and we must find their contacts so that
they can isolate
and in people who've traveled from
high-risk areas they also should isolate
and this means
that they are taking on behalf of
society a
big step forward to keep the virus out
of circulation whilst they are still
infectious this is an absolutely
critical part
of the response the third one
and in many ways the most difficult uh
is that we have to break
unnecessary links between households
because that is the way in which this
forest is transmitted
and this means reducing social contacts
uh whether they are at work
and this is where we have enormous
gratitude to all the businesses
for example who worked so hard to make
their environments kobe secure to reduce
the risk
and also in social environments
and we have to try and do this in the
least damaging way but we
we all know we cannot do this without
some
significant downsides and this is this
is a balance of risk
between if we don't do enough the virus
will take off and we at the moment
that is the path that we are clearly on
and we if we do not change course then
we're going to find ourselves in a very
difficult problem
as patrick has laid out the final thing
we can do
is the science is investing in drugs
vaccines
diagnostics and patrick is going to take
us through as the final section
where we've got to with the most
exciting of these which is vaccines
thank you very much as chris has said we
will be living with these facts of this
virus this is now circulating amongst
the population worldwide
it will continue to do so we will be
learning how to live with it
one important part of that is vaccines
i'm pleased to say that there is good
progress that's been made
many vaccines now have shown they
generate an immune response
of a type that ought to be protective
and several vaccines are in very late
stage clinical testing
aiming to show that they are both
effective and safe
the uk through the vaccines task force
has got
access to a number of these as
illustrated on this slide
with a range of different vaccine
technologies
from a number of different companies
the uk therefore has put itself in a
good position
in terms of vaccine supply and the
possibility that one of these will work
we don't yet know that they will work
but there is increasing evidence that
it's pointed in the right direction
and it's possible that some vaccine
could be available before the end of the
year in small amounts
for certain groups much more likely that
we'll see vaccines becoming available
over the first half of next year again
not certain
but pointed in the right direction which
then of course gives the possibility
of a different approach to this virus
but in the meantime
we've got to get on control control of
this in the way that chris has described
in order to make sure that we can live
with it in a way that's sustainable
and protects health and society overall
thank you very much
you're watching a bbc news special and
we have been hearing
from the uk's chief medical officer
professor
chris witte and the chief scientific
officer
sir patrick valance bringing us the very
latest coronavirus data
for the uk our health correspondent
lauren moss
is with me lauren a lot of graphs a lot
of figures help us interpret them
yes indeed well a lot of this today uh
with the two people you're just talking
about it was
really a pulling together of a lot of
the data that we've seen emerging over
the last couple of weeks especially on
friday as well and i think it's a
the first time that the pair of them
have spoken without a politician as well
publicly as well perhaps really to sort
of hammer home the seriousness of where
we are
at this stage in the pandemic and what
that data is is telling us so it can
bring you some of the graphs now that
they
they ran through then i mean uh firstly
it was it was very clear that sir
patrick
valance and chris whitty were very keen
to make that comparison between the uk
and france and spain
to see what we can learn from other
countries so much of that was made
earlier on in the pandemic with what
happened in italy for example
so you can see on the graph now
hopefully that over a two week period
over the last couple of months i should
say firstly that spain and france have
had an increase in cases but what you
don't see on this graph
here is that now spain is at around 300
cases per 100 000 people france is at
185 and the uk
is at 69. that data isn't on these
graphs but that does tell you that the
uk is still
lower than those countries which is why
they wanted to sort of emphasize where
those countries are really to sort of
show
potentially possibly where the uk could
go and that's what they don't want to
happen that's
the start warning here and other
european countries have far lower case
rates such as italy sweden germany and
cyprus and so on
and you can also see in the graph how
fatalities have climbed quite quickly in
spain but have now
dropped off and we also do need to bear
in mind hospital admissions as well we
can come on to that
in a moment and we're also shown that
the number of new cases here as well as
another slide here
you can see that they're climbing in all
age groups which we have known about
over the last couple of weeks
largely among the 20 to 29 year old age
group and then
30 to 39 but also across all age groups
and across the country
and noticeably as well you can see that
line climbing up among those aged 80 and
above
another 4 000 cases confirmed yesterday
and
sir patrick valance said it's not just
down to an increase in testing it's the
positivity
of testing the number of people being
tested coming back as positive that is
increasing and last week's uh survey
figures household survey
infection figures show that around 60 to
70 000 people in the uk currently has
the virus possibly 6 000 today
and he said there's no doubt that we are
in a situation where the numbers are
increasing
the next graph was quite interesting and
we need to look at this with some
caution now this is a
forecast of what could happen if the
virus doubles
continues to double every week which
figures suggest over the last couple of
weeks or so that is what it's doing but
this isn't a prediction
of where we will end up it's just a
possible forecast of what could happen
and the science is divided on this at
the moment we know that the r number
is estimated in the uk to be between 1.1
and 1.4
and remind us what the r number is of
course the r number is the number of
people
that an infected person can potentially
pass the virus on to so
say for example for every 10 people
infected could go on to infect
11 to 14 other people above one means
it's spreading but
the peak of the virus and just before
lockdown it was thought to be around
three and quadrupling
every every week so we aren't there yet
and this is where
we we need to look at it hand in hand
with hospital admissions as well because
this is the best way to sort of
calculate the severity of the virus
but the risk of doing that is you get
that data too late because
from when somebody uh becomes gets the
virus they then develop symptoms
they then become unwell and it's a few
days later a week ten days later that
they may then
need hospital treatment so by the time
they're admitted to hospital
if the virus is that severe then if you
if you act after that that could be
too late to then stop the virus
spreading and that's the situation
that the government has to make a
decision on now and we know that those
hospital
admission figures are increasing with
more than a thousand in hospital at the
moment but then again compared to the
peak of the pandemic
there were 20 000 people in hospital
across the uk
and again just to to draw back to france
and spain we can't show you that data
but i can tell you that france's
hospital admissions are around
20 of what they were at the peak of the
pandemic spain is at less than 10
percent
so although as chris whittie said we
have turned a corner and not a good one
recently
we aren't where we were in in march and
april and the key thing is to make sure
we don't get back there
remind us what they said about immunity
yes so this is where they have
done random sort of infection studies to
check uh if people have
uh antibodies this is the blood test
that's been carried out and
the figure suggests that only around
eight percent of people have
antibodies which means the vast majority
of people are still susceptible to
to catching this virus and eight percent
is three million people am i right
something like that yes it would be like
that but i mean it's still far lower
than what would be required for any kind
of immunity
across the population eight percent is
not is is not very high it's still
difficult really to quantify these
figures unless you've carried out a
blood test on the whole of the
population
but those numbers still very low when
you've got an infection that could be
doubling every week it's very serious
therefore all eyes on a potential
vaccine and they seem
quite optimistic about that didn't you
think yes they said uh sympathetic
balance
said that there are several vaccines in
the late stages now of clinical testing
now we've been talking about vaccines
for several months it seems to be
you know what everyone is hoping for to
move us past this indeed
the health secretary last week said
we're in a process of really kind of
trying to delay this until the cavalry
arrives i think that's what matt hancock
described as cavalry being
new treatments which we we do have a
steroid treatment for people who end up
very unwell in hospital with coronavirus
i think you know the ramp top testing
and tracing and isolating
system as well and then the vaccine at
the end of it now any vaccine is still
several months away there's many
rigorous testing stages they have to go
through
and making sure that it would be safe
but the uk has signed up to
to quite a lot of them as patrick
valance pointed out
but i think any vaccine once it has been
approved is still
looking at springtime okay lauren thanks
for that lauren moss our health
correspondent
let's head straight to westminster now
our chief political correspondent vicky
young
is there and vicki we've been hearing
from the government's chief scientific
advisor we've been hearing from
the government's chief medical advisor
but on their own
not with any members of the government
as lauren was saying
that is unusual so what's the thinking
well we know that there have been
meetings going on
all weekend with the prime minister and
with some of his advisers and with those
scientists
trying to work out what to do chris
whittie very clear that this situation
requires
speed and action and clear to about what
it needs to do it needs to break that
chain it needs to break the transmission
of this virus
so the question is if you're the prime
minister sitting there looking at those
graphs
what action do you take now he's made
his reluctance to go for a
another national lockdown very clear
it seems very unlikely from everything
we've heard
privately and publicly from ministers
that that is going to be the road that
they go
down the question is what measures will
they bring in
how severe will they be now they talked
there didn't they about
uh household transmission about social
interaction it seems very likely that it
will be in that kind of area remember
a week ago they brought in this rule of
six uh in england
to try and do just that do they go for
what's been known as a
circuit break a short maybe a couple of
weeks
uh shock to the system really bringing
in quite severe restrictions to try
and stop this progressing in the way
that they were laying out there which
leads inevitably to more cases
and they say that more deaths come
november that is one option
being looked at but i think what's clear
is we are way past that
moment where the government strategy of
dampening down these local
hot spots of infection that just isn't
working enough now the
virus is pretty widespread across most
of the united kingdom
they're going to have to do more and
what they're trying to do here is to
balance
the saving of lives with the uh
effect on the economy which of course as
chris whittie said there
uh has huge impacts of its own an
incredibly
challenging balancing act as you say how
much tension vicky is there in the
cabinet
about what measures to take i think
there's been this tension
all along hasn't there i mean it is
inevitable it doesn't mean that one side
doesn't understand the other uh matt
hancock health secretary has talked
about
uh this before saying look yes he is of
course looking at the data for hospitals
uh and rishi soon at the chancellor is
looking at graphs uh showing
the impact on the economy on people
losing their jobs
but they do both understand the other's
point of view and it is a balancing act
which ultimately only the prime minister
can make that decision but i think they
probably have decided at this point
that it's not going to be another
national lockdown i don't think they
think that the economy
could recover from that in any way at
all in the short term
and they're very very concerned about
what that does
to to people's futures they've looked to
of course
education having previously closed
schools very rapidly
the prime minister has made it clear
that schools will be the last thing
to close they want to keep the education
of children going of course there
is still quite a lot of disruption lots
of children still being sent home
from school as uh coveted cases arise
but that is the way that they are going
they're not going to be in a position
again
where the pubs are open and the schools
are closed they want to make sure that
doesn't happen but i think the
hospitality sector is certainly one
they're looking at
could they bring in curfews for example
we've seen that being brought in as a
measure
in lots of areas of the country that
could be one way of doing it or do they
go even further
and this is partly to about enforcement
there are an awful lot of rules out
there
they're making the point that yes people
are going back to the office but the
rules around that to make it covid
secure
should mean that transmission isn't as
bad as it would be
necessarily in a household so again
these are all the things that they're
they're weighing up looking at people's
jobs but also looking at how they break
the transmission of this virus
thanks for that vicky vicky young there
our chief political correspondent
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news